Mapping Inequality

For our project, we were interested in taking an in-depth look at cities and their demographics across the United States of America by analysing the census data from the United States Census Bureau for the year 2010. Our project is essentially a visualization of census data for the 1,000 largest cities by population in the United States of America. Starting with a point in the center of a city, we use radial graphing to create different ‘radial circles’. Each radial circle represents a certain distance from the city center and it shows statistics like race, income, poverty and even geographics mobility for block groups contained within that circle. The main questions that we wanted to help answer were: are factors like income, poverty or race in urban communities related to their distance from the geographic center of their respective city? How do cities compare across the United States in their demographics relative to the city center? Are there common features between economically prosperous urban centers that would allow us to formulate predictions about other cities? 

Previously, we had only planned to analyse data about housing and land prices from the cities of San Francisco and Durham and compare their statistics over time. However, we found out that the census data we possessed was extremely comprehensive and granular enough that we could apply it to every major city in the US that was contained in the census and get in-depth information about each block group within a certain geographical area. Because of the nature of census data, it is also easier for us to make sure that the different tables are from the same time period, which eliminates the concern that our data could be inconsistent with respect to time and thus be incomparable.

In our project we have focused on a few key factors to set us apart from similar ones. Firstly, we have aimed for an encompassing collection of data that contains granular information about a maximum number of cities across the whole of the United States instead of one state or one county. We have also made a geographical feature, city center and distance from it in our case, a standard benchmark which will allow comparison between different cities. We have also aimed for variety in our data instead of focusing on just one factor so we could identify possible correlations. Although the different radial layers aren’t fully implemented in the front end as of yet, we are able to return the data for block groups in the following radiuses from a city center: under five miles, five to ten miles, ten to twenty, and over twenty miles. 

We mainly derived our idea of radial graphs from the Mapping Inequality Project (MIP) which visualized historic data (1935-1940) from the records of the Home Owners Loan Corporation. MIP focuses on providing an insight into how property was assessed by property developers in Depression-era America and how it propagated racial and class segregation. It used radial graphs to show property desirability relative to the city center. In our project, the city center is an even more important indicator and a main focus of the questions we have raised above. We have also looked at a much larger collection of data for an even larger number of cities than MIP and have also made radial graphing a central feature to aid us in analysing census statistics relative to the city center. 

Two other projects that we also got inspiration from were the Durham Neighborhood Compass (DNC) which shows block group data from the census about Durham County and the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project (AEMP) which reveals data about evictions in San Francisco neighborhoods. DNC is closer to our project in that it displays census data for each block group but it is extremely limited because it features only Durham County and does not offer a standard benchmark like city center which one can compare data against. AEMP is also limited in scope because it focuses only on the Bay Area although it goes to a greater depth due to its focus on neighborhoods instead of block groups. It also only displays data about evictions and does not attempt to correlate that data with a variable like distance from an urban centre.

All of our data comes from the 2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates from the Census Bureau. For the back end API, we use Flask as our web framework and SQLAlchemy to query the PostgreSQL database. The front end will pass the central coordinates of the city of interest, as well as the desired distance range from the city center. Using the Census Geocode API developed by the Census Bureau, we are able to retrieve the county name and the state the city is in. This will then allow us to query our own database, and return all the GIS IDs contained within the county. Matching these IDs against another database (“tract_data”) containing coordinate information about the Census Tracts, we could calculate the distance between each tract and the city center. This allows us to divide the tracts and the relevant GIS IDs within the county into four categories based on how far it is from the city center: Under Five, Five to Ten, Ten to Twenty, and Over Twenty. This would become especially helpful, when we display our data based on these four radiuses. 

Then, the GIS IDs are matched back to the main databases to get the information we’d like to return to the front end. The results are aggregated by the same distance-based category described above. 

To visualize our data, we created a map using leaflet, an open-source JavaScript library for interactive maps. We were able to create an interactive map using GeoJSON layers and javascript. The first layer on our map is each US state color-coded by population density. The lighter the color, the smaller the population density value. Additionally, we added a highlight feature to each state when we hover over it. By clicking on it, we zoom in to the location where we clicked and see a pop up with the state’s name. Cities are represented by white circles with a red border. Leaflet allowed us to use each city’s longitude and latitude coordinates to place the circle marker on its city center. By clicking on a city, we zoom in on the map where three circles representing the distance from the city center pop up. Clicking each circle allows us to view the information in our database corresponding to each respective city. Alternatively, we have created a search bar using javascript that allows users to search for a specific city. When the user types an input, the search bar automatically narrows down the list of cities. By clicking on a city from the search results, we zoom in to the map to where that city is located. Once again, three circles pop up that allow the user to view the information from our database for that particular city. 

Our visualization is already extremely comprehensive due to the exhaustiveness of the data involved. However, we are only using data from a single census. Our next option would be to integrate census data from multiple years so we can analyze how those demographics change over time as cities expand or experience economic distress.  Using data from multiple years will also allow us to predict with greater accuracy by comparing city demographics from previous years and noting the common trends that arise in cities over the years. It will also allow us to visualize the effect of policies and bills and we can observe how much of an impact a certain municipal decree had on a city. We can use that to extrapolate information about whether new laws would have a positive or negative effect on city demographics. The exhaustiveness of our data also allows us the luxury to raise questions beyond our original scope and point us towards other data sets we can use to confirm those questions. What can geographic mobility tell us about the housing situation in a city? If a city has a high travel time to work for people near the center, does that mean people are unable to find suitable work and does that presage an outflux of residents? Other possible extensions of our project include creating cross-city visualizations, as well as the incorporation of an even broader range of Census data.
